.TH YCA-ACME 1 "July 2026" "yca" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
yca\-acme \- ACME (RFC 8555) issuance frontend for a yca certificate authority
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B yca\-acme
[\fIflags\fR]
.br
.B yca\-acme eab new
[\fB\-\-state\fR \fIdb\fR] [\fB\-\-allow\fR \fIpatterns\fR]
.br
.B yca\-acme eab list
[\fB\-\-state\fR \fIdb\fR]
.br
.B yca\-acme eab delete
[\fB\-\-state\fR \fIdb\fR] \fIkid\fR
.br
.B yca\-acme ari accelerate
[\fB\-\-state\fR \fIdb\fR] \fB\-\-issuer\fR \fIcn\fR [\fB\-\-window\fR \fIdur\fR]
.br
.B yca\-acme ari list
[\fB\-\-state\fR \fIdb\fR]
.br
.B yca\-acme ari clear
[\fB\-\-state\fR \fIdb\fR] \fB\-\-issuer\fR \fIcn\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B yca\-acme
exposes RFC 8555 (ACME) issuance for the server profile of a
.BR yca (1)
CA: standard clients (acme.sh, certbot, Caddy, ...) enroll, validate
control of their names via http\-01 or dns\-01 (wildcards included), and
receive certificates. The daemon owns only protocol state, kept in its own
database; every issuance and revocation execs the \fByca\fR CLI, the
single owner of the CA store, so policy, locking and the audit log apply
unchanged.
.PP
Registration is gated by External Account Binding: credentials are
provisioned with \fByca\-acme eab new\fR, shown once, and carry an
identifier allow\-list. The suggested renewal window (ARI, RFC 9773)
mirrors the CA's renewal\-window policy.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-state " db"
Protocol state database (default: \fB./acme.db\fR). Accounts, EAB
credentials, orders and issued chains; never the CA store.
.TP
.BI \-\-listen " addr"
Listen address (default: \fB127.0.0.1:8555\fR).
.TP
.BI \-\-url " base"
EXTERNAL base URL, exactly what clients use (e.g.
\fBhttps://pki.example.ca\fR). Every JWS binds the request URL; a
mismatch fails all requests with 401.
.TP
.BI \-\-yca " path"
The yca binary (default: \fByca\fR on PATH).
.TP
.BI \-\-config " path\fR, \fP\-\-store " dir
Passed through to the yca CLI.
.TP
.BI \-\-id " id"
Enrolled identity used for signing (default: \fBacme\fR; one\-time
\fByca enroll \-\-id acme\fR).
.TP
.BI \-\-valid " N" {s|m|h|d}
Validity requested per issuance, passed through to \fByca sign
\-\-valid\fR. The CA validates it ([5m, \fBee_valid_days\fR]; the locked
policy is the ceiling, shorter is always allowed). Empty (default): the
CA issues at its \fBee_valid_days\fR policy.
.TP
.BI \-\-http01\-port " port"
Port http\-01 validation connects to on identifiers (default: 80).
.TP
.BI \-\-dns " host[:53]"
Resolver for dns\-01 TXT lookups, e.g. the bind serving the identifier
zones (default: the system resolver).
.TP
.BI \-\-tls\-cert " file\fR, \fP\-\-tls\-key " file
Serve TLS directly (the cert file may hold the full chain). Normally
unset: nginx terminates TLS (see share/nginx/yca.conf).
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
\fBeab new\fR [\fB\-\-allow\fR \fIpatterns\fR]
Provision an External Account Binding credential; the kid and HMAC key
are printed ONCE. \fIpatterns\fR is a comma\-separated identifier policy:
exact names or \fB*.\fIsuffix\fR wildcards (empty = any name).
.TP
.B eab list
List provisioned credentials (kids and policies, never keys).
.TP
.BI "eab delete " kid
Revoke a credential. Accounts registered with it keep existing but can
no longer order anything (their identifier policy is gone) \- this is
the containment step for a leaked credential or a decommissioned
operator.
.TP
\fBari accelerate\fR \fB\-\-issuer\fR \fIcn\fR [\fB\-\-window\fR \fIdur\fR]
Have every certificate issued by the CA generation \fIcn\fR suggested
for replacement at once, instead of at its policy age: the renewal
window returned by \fBrenewalInfo\fR opens immediately and closes
\fIdur\fR later (default 2h). Use it after revoking a compromised
signing CA generation (\fByca revoke ca\fR). Clients pick a uniformly
random moment inside the window (RFC 9773), which is what keeps a whole
fleet from arriving at once \- issuance is serialized behind one CA, so
size \fIdur\fR for the number of certificates. The directive is
self\-limiting: a replaced certificate is signed by the successor
generation and stops matching. A revoked certificate is told to replace
at once whether or not a directive exists.
.TP
.B ari list
List the active accelerations: issuer, window, and when it was set.
.TP
\fBari clear\fR \fB\-\-issuer\fR \fIcn\fR
Drop an acceleration; that issuer's certificates return to the policy
window.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CA_STORE_PASSPHRASE / CA_HSM_PIN
The CA secret for the exec'd \fByca sign\fR/\fByca revoke\fR, per the
store's key backend. Under systemd it comes from
\fB/etc/yca/yca.env\fR (see share/systemd/yca\-acme.service).
.SH FILES
.TP
.B acme.db
Protocol state (0600). Losing it does not affect the CA: issued
certificates live in the store; clients re\-register.
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on success; the daemon logs to standard error (the journal under
systemd).
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
yca enroll \-\-id acme
yca\-acme eab new \-\-state /var/lib/yca/acme.db \-\-allow '*.example.ca'
yca\-acme \-\-state /var/lib/yca/acme.db \-\-url https://pki.example.ca \\
    \-\-yca /usr/local/bin/yca \-\-config /var/lib/yca/yca.toml \\
    \-\-store /var/lib/yca/store
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR yca (1);
RFC 8555 (ACME), RFC 9773 (ARI).
