.TH YCA-OCSP 1 "July 2026" "yca" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
yca\-ocsp \- delegated OCSP responder for a yca certificate authority
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B yca\-ocsp
[\fB\-store\fR \fIdir\fR] [\fB\-listen\fR \fIaddr\fR] [\fB\-path\fR \fIpath\fR] [\fB\-validity\fR \fIdur\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B yca\-ocsp
answers RFC 6960 OCSP requests for certificates issued by a
.BR yca (1)
signing CA. It runs in the delegated model: responses are signed with the
short-lived responder credential issued by \fByca create ocsp\fR; the CA
key (possibly on an HSM) is never touched. Certificate status is read
directly from the store database (read-only); the responder serves the AIA
URL baked into every issued certificate
(http://<repository_host>/ocsp, normally behind a reverse proxy).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-store " dir"
The yca store directory (default: \fB./store\fR).
.TP
.BI \-listen " addr"
Listen address (default: \fB127.0.0.1:23509\fR).
.TP
.BI \-path " path"
Base HTTP path, matching the AIA URL path (default: \fB/ocsp\fR).
.TP
.BI \-validity " dur"
Response window: nextUpdate = thisUpdate + \fIdur\fR; also drives
Cache-Control max-age (default: \fB1h\fR).
.TP
.B \-version
Print the release version and exit (\fBdev\fR when built without the
release wrapper scripts).
.SH ENDPOINTS
.TP
.B POST /ocsp
Body is a DER OCSPRequest (application/ocsp-request).
.TP
.B GET /ocsp/<base64>
RFC 6960 A.1 form: URL-escaped standard base64 of the DER request;
cacheable.
.TP
.B GET /healthz
Returns 200 when the database and responder credentials are readable.
.SH OPERATION
Run as the store owner: the database is mode 0600 and reading a WAL
database needs write access to its \-wal/\-shm siblings. The responder
answers only for its store's signing CA (anything else gets
\fBunauthorized\fR). Credential rotation needs no restart: after
\fByca revoke ocsp\fR and \fByca create ocsp\fR the new files are picked up
automatically (mtime-based reload). A hardened systemd unit and an nginx
reverse-proxy configuration ship in \fBshare/systemd/\fR and
\fBshare/nginx/\fR.
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on clean shutdown; nonzero when startup fails (bad store, bind failure).
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
yca\-ocsp \-store /var/lib/yca/store \-listen 127.0.0.1:23509
curl \-i http://127.0.0.1:23509/healthz
openssl ocsp \-issuer store/ca/ca\-e1.pem \-cert store/ee/www.crt \\
  \-url http://127.0.0.1:23509/ocsp \-CAfile store/ca/ets\-root\-e1.pem
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR yca (1)
