.TH YCA 1 "July 2026" "yca" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
yca \- a 2-tier ECDSA certificate authority
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B yca
[\fB\-\-config\fR \fIpath\fR] [\fB\-\-store\fR \fIdir\fR] \fIcommand\fR [\fIargs\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B yca
operates a simple two-tier X.509 CA (offline-style root plus
signing CA): it initializes the hierarchy, issues and revokes end-entity
certificates, maintains signed CRLs, and exports artifacts. Storage is a
single SQLite database plus delivered PEM/DER files under the store
directory. CA keys live either software-encrypted in the store
(\fBinternal\fR backend) or on a PKCS#11 token/HSM (\fBpkcs11\fR backend);
see the configuration file.
.PP
At
.B yca init
the configuration is snapshotted into the store database, which becomes the
source of truth; later edits to locked fields in the file are ignored with a
warning. The configuration is fully locked: re\-initialize to change
anything. Per\-issuance flexibility is \fB\-\-valid\fR, capped by
\fBee_valid_days\fR.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-config " path"
Configuration file (default: \fByca.toml\fR in the current directory).
.TP
.BI \-\-store " dir"
Store/artifacts directory (default: \fB./store\fR). Created only by
\fBinit\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-log " path"
Log file (default: \fByca.log\fR next to the store directory). File
logging cannot be disabled: an empty \fIpath\fR is ignored with a warning,
an unwritable one aborts.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the release version and exit.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init
Initialize the PKI: create the root and signing CA (and empty signed CRLs).
With the \fBinternal\fR backend a store passphrase is generated and shown
once if \fBCA_STORE_PASSPHRASE\fR is unset. With \fBpkcs11\fR, an existing
token keypair must already be labeled with the derived CA slug
(\fB<slug_prefix>1\fR at init) to be adopted (curve-checked); a missing
one is generated on the token under exactly that label. Fails if the
store is already initialized.
.TP
\fBcreate\fR \fIserver\fR|\fIclient\fR \fB\-\-cn\fR \fIcn\fR [\fB\-\-san\fR \fItype:name\fR ...] [\fB\-\-valid\fR \fIN\fR{s|m|h|d}]
Issue an end-entity certificate. \fB\-\-san\fR is repeatable with
\fItype\fR one of \fBdns\fR, \fBemail\fR, \fBip\fR, \fBuri\fR; servers
always get DNS:\fIcn\fR added, clients require at least one SAN. A
\fBuri\fR SAN must be an absolute, printable-ASCII URI, and one using
the \fBspiffe\fR scheme must be a valid SPIFFE ID; at most one
\fBuri\fR per certificate (an X509\-SVID carries exactly one).
\fB\-\-valid\fR
requests a shorter validity for this one issuance, range [5m,
\fBee_valid_days\fR]: the configured policy is both the default and the
ceiling, a request below it is always allowed; nothing is persisted. One
active certificate per (CN, profile); once the active one has
less than 33% of its lifetime left, an overlapping successor may be issued
(renewal window) and the old certificate simply expires.
.TP
\fBenroll\fR \fB\-\-id\fR \fIid\fR
Enroll an identity (e.g. an email address) so it can request nonces and CSR
signatures. Fails if already enrolled.
.TP
\fBsign\fR \fIserver\fR|\fIclient\fR \fB\-\-id\fR \fIid\fR \fB\-\-nonce\fR \fInonce\fR \fB\-\-csr\fR \fIcsr\fR [\fB\-\-valid\fR \fIN\fR{s|m|h|d}]
Issue an end-entity certificate from an external PKCS#10 CSR, gated by a
valid (\fIid\fR, \fInonce\fR) pair from \fBget nonce\fR; the nonce is
consumed on success (single use). \fIcsr\fR is inline PEM, \fB\-\fR for
standard input, or a file path (PEM/DER auto-detected). Only the public key
(ECDSA on the \fBee_curve\fR curve), the subject CN and the supported SANs
(dns, email, IPv4, URI) are taken from the CSR; every other requested
extension or DN attribute is ignored and the CA dictates the profile.
The \fBuri\fR rules of \fBcreate\fR apply, so a CSR carrying more than
one URI SAN is refused.
\fB\-\-valid\fR behaves exactly as in \fBcreate\fR. Prints the CN on
standard output for piping into \fBget\fR \fB\-\-cn \-\fR; writes nothing
under \fBee/\fR (the private key stays with the requester).
.TP
\fBrevoke\fR \fIserver\fR|\fIclient\fR|\fIca\fR [\fB\-\-cn\fR \fIcn\fR | \fB\-\-serial\fR \fIhex\fR] [\fB\-\-reason\fR \fIname\fR]
Revoke a certificate and rewrite the signed CRL. For \fIserver\fR and
\fIclient\fR the entry goes on the CRL of the generation that issued the
certificate, not of whichever signs today. \fIca\fR revokes a signing CA
generation instead, selected by \fB\-\-cn\fR (its common name, or
\fBsigning-ca\fR for the active one) and never by \fB\-\-serial\fR: the
entry goes on the \fBroot\fR CRL, the only thing that ever writes there,
and the updated CRL carries a fresh nextUpdate, so only publication is
left to do. Refused for the root, which relying parties drop from their
trust stores rather than revoke, and for the active issuer, which
\fBrenew signing-ca\fR must replace first so issuance never has a gap.
By \fB\-\-cn\fR the newest
active certificate for that name is revoked; \fB\-\-serial\fR (hex,
\fB:\fR separators and leading zeros tolerated) selects the exact
certificate (during a renewal overlap two can be active). \fIname\fR is a
case-insensitive CRLReason: \fBunspecified\fR (default),
\fBkeyCompromise\fR, \fBcACompromise\fR, \fBaffiliationChanged\fR,
\fBsuperseded\fR, \fBcessationOfOperation\fR, \fBcertificateHold\fR,
\fBremoveFromCRL\fR, \fBprivilegeWithdrawn\fR, \fBaACompromise\fR.
.TP
\fBrenew\fR \fIsigning\-ca\fR \fB\-\-new\-cn\fR \fIcn\fR
Create the next generation of the signing CA: a fresh key and the
configured signing profile under the new display name \fIcn\fR, signed by
the active root, so this brings the root key online like a root CRL
refresh. The slug is derived (\fB<signing_ca_slug_prefix><generation>\fR)
and with \fBpkcs11\fR the keypair is generated on the token under that
label. The successor becomes the issuer of every new certificate; the
incumbent turns retiring and keeps publishing its own CRL until the last
certificate it signed has expired, so old chains keep validating. Refused
when \fIcn\fR already names a generation, or when the new CA would
outlive the root. Prints the new CN on standard output.
.TP
\fBrefresh\fR \fIcrl\fR [\fBroot\fR|\fBsigning\fR|\fBall\fR]
Re-sign the published CRLs selected by the scope (default \fBall\fR) from
their current entry sets: same unexpired revocations, crlNumber+1, fresh
thisUpdate/nextUpdate. Entries whose certificate has expired are pruned
per RFC 5280 3.3 (an entry leaves the CRL only after one scheduled CRL
issued beyond the certificate's validity has carried it), so a CRL is
bounded by the revoked-and-unexpired set, not by the CA's age; the store
keeps every revocation. A scope covers every live generation of that CA:
after a rotation the retiring predecessor keeps publishing its own CRL
next to the active one's, and an expired generation is skipped. The signing CRL promises re-publication within 7
days, the root CRL within 183 days (both clamped to the issuing CA's
notAfter); the \fBsigning\fR scope never loads the root key. Run each
scope on a schedule shorter than its horizon (daily
\fByca-crl-refresh.timer\fR, quarterly \fByca-root-crl-refresh.timer\fR)
so relying parties never see a stale CRL. Trade-off of the long root
horizon: a relying party may keep serving a cached root CRL until its
nextUpdate, so after \fBrevoke\fR \fIca\fR publish the fresh one at once
instead of waiting for the quarterly timer.
.TP
\fBget\fR \fIserver\fR|\fIclient\fR|\fIca\fR|\fIcrl\fR|\fIconfig\fR|\fInonce\fR [\fB\-\-cn\fR \fIcn\fR] [\fB\-\-id\fR \fIid\fR] [\fB\-\-encoding\fR \fBpem\fR|\fBder\fR]
Write a certificate, CRL, the effective (database) configuration, or an
enrollment nonce to standard output (default \fBpem\fR). For
\fIca\fR/\fIcrl\fR, \fB\-\-cn\fR takes \fBroot-ca\fR, \fBsigning-ca\fR, or
the CA common name; \fIconfig\fR takes no \fB\-\-cn\fR;
\fInonce\fR takes \fB\-\-id\fR instead and returns the pending nonce while
most of its 5-minute validity remains, rotating it otherwise. \fB\-\-cn\fR
\fB\-\fR reads the CN from standard input (piping from \fBsign\fR). Needs no
secret.
.TP
\fBlist\fR \fIfilter\fR [\fB\-\-tsv\fR] [\fB\-\-limit\fR \fIN\fR]
List certificates matching exactly one filter: \fB\-\-expiring\fR [\fIN\fR],
\fB\-\-expired\fR [\fIN\fR], \fB\-\-revoked\fR [\fIN\fR], \fB\-\-last\fR
[\fIN\fR] (window in days, 1\-398, default 30), or \fB\-\-cn\fR
\fIcn\fR|\fBroot-ca\fR|\fBsigning-ca\fR. Columns: CN, kind, serial
(truncated), expiry, status. \fB\-\-tsv\fR emits tab-separated output.
At most \fB\-\-limit\fR rows are printed (default 50, \fB0\fR for all); a
truncated listing says so on standard error.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CA_STORE_PASSPHRASE
Store passphrase (\fBinternal\fR key backend). Generated and shown once at
init when unset.
.TP
.B CA_HSM_PIN
PKCS#11 user PIN (\fBpkcs11\fR key backend). Exactly one login attempt per
run: hardware tokens decrement a PIN retry counter.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B yca.toml
Declarative configuration; locked into the store at init.
.TP
.B <store>/ca-store.db
SQLite store: certificates, encrypted CA keys (internal backend),
revocations, configuration snapshot, query index.
.TP
.B <store>/ca/<slug>.{pem,crt,crl}
Published CA certificates (PEM and DER) and signed CRLs, named for the
AIA/CDP URLs.
.TP
.B <store>/ee/<cn-slug>.{crt,key}
Delivered end-entity credentials.
.TP
.B yca.log
Diagnostic log, next to the store directory (\fB\-\-log\fR overrides).
Errors are also mirrored to standard error.
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on success, 1 on any error (details on stderr and in the log).
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
yca init
yca create server \-\-cn server.example.ca \-\-san dns:example.ca
yca enroll \-\-id user@example.ca
yca sign server \-\-id user@example.ca \e
    \-\-nonce $(yca get nonce \-\-id user@example.ca) \e
    \-\-csr server.csr | yca get server \-\-cn \-
yca revoke server \-\-cn server.example.ca \-\-reason keyCompromise
yca get crl \-\-cn signing\-ca > signing.crl
yca list \-\-expiring 7
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR yca\-acme (1)
